Chambers of the heart
Right atrium (Fig. 25)
The right atrium receives the superior vena cava in its upper and posterior
part, the inferior vena cava and coronary sinus in its lower part, and the
anterior cardiac vein (draining much of the front of the heart) anteriorly.
Running more or less vertically downwards between the venae cavae is a
distinct muscular ridge, the crista terminalis (indicated on the outer surface
of the atrium by a shallow groove the sulcus terminalis). This ridge separates the smooth  walled posterior part of the atrium, derived from the
sinus venosus, from the rough  walled anterior portion which is prolonged
into the auricular appendage and which is derived from the true fetal
atrium.
The openings of the inferior vena cava and the coronary sinus are
guarded by rudimentary valves; that of the inferior vena cava being continuous with the annulus ovalis around the shallow depression on the atrial
septum, the fossa ovalis, which marks the site of the fetal foramen ovale.
The mediastinum 31
Fig. 25 KThe interior of the right atrium and ventricle.

Right ventricle (Fig. 25)
The right ventricle is joined to the right atrium by the way of the vertically
disposed tricuspid valve, and with the pulmonary trunk through the pulmonary valve. A muscular ridge, the infundibuloventricular crest, between
the atrioventricular and pulmonary orifices, separates the inflow, and
outflow tracts of the ventricle. The inner aspect of the inflow tract path is
marked in the presence of a number of irregular muscular elevations (trabeculae carneae) from some of which the papillary muscles project into the
lumen of the ventricle and find attachment to the free borders of the cusps
of the tricuspid valve by way of the chordae tendineae. The moderator band is a
muscular bundle crossing the ventricular cavity from the interventricular
septum to the anterior wall and is of some importance since it conveys the
right branch of the atrioventricular bundle to the ventricular muscle.
The outflow tract of the ventricle or infundibulum is smooth  walled and
is directed upwards and to the right towards the pulmonary trunk. The
pulmonary orifice is guarded by the pulmonary valves, comprising three
semilunar cusps.
Left atrium
The left atrium is rather smaller than the right but has somewhat thicker
walls. On the upper part of its posterior wall it presents the openings of the
four pulmonary veins and on its septal surface there is a shallow depression
corresponding to the fossa ovalis of the right atrium. As on the right side,
the main part of the cavity is smooth  walled but the surface of the auricle is
marked by a number of ridges due to the underlying pectinate muscles.
Left ventricle (Fig. 26)
The left ventricle communicates with the left atrium by way of the mitral
valve (so  called because it vaguely resembles a bishop   s mitre), which possesses a large anterior and a smaller posterior cusp attached to papillary
muscles by chordae tendineae. With the exception of the fibrous vestibule
immediately below the aortic orifice, the wall of the left ventricle is marked
by thick trabeculae carneae.
The aortic orifice is guarded by the three semilunar cusps of the aortic
valve, immediately above which are the dilated aortic sinuses. The mouths of
the right and left coronary arteries are seen in the anterior and left posterior
sinus respectively.
The conducting system of the heart
This consists of specialized cardiac muscle found in the sinuatrial node and
in the atrioventricular node and bundle. The heart  beat is initiated in the
sinuatrial node (the  pacemaker of the heart   ), situated in the upper part
of the crista terminalis just to the right of the opening of the superior
vena cava into the right atrium. From there the cardiac impulse spreads he atrial septum immediately above the opening of the coronary sinus. The
impulse is then conducted to the ventricles by way of the specialized tissue
of the atrioventricular bundle (of His). This bundle divides at the junction of
the membranous and muscular parts of the interventricular septum into its
right and left branches which run immediately beneath the endocardium to
activate all parts of the ventricular musculature.
The blood supply to the heart (Fig. 27)
The heart   s blood supply is derived from the right and left coronary arteries
whose main branches lie in the interventricular and atrioventricular
grooves.
The right coronary artery arises from the anterior aortic sinus and passes
forwards between the pulmonary trunk and the right atrium to descend in
the right part of the atrioventricular groove. At the inferior border of the
heart it continues along the atrioventricular groove to anastomose with the
left coronary at the posterior interventricular groove. It gives off a marginal
branch along the lower border of the heart and the posterior interventricular
branch which runs forward in the inferior interventricular groove and to
anastomose near the apex of the heart with the corresponding branch of the
left coronary artery